9

Concluding Remarks: Video Games versus Books, and Other Egg-Endian (Non)Debates

**The feline handkerchief: The story-game complex in video games**

In thinking of the video game player’s involvement in the multiple instances of gameplay, a comparison with a scene in a children’s story by the Bengali writer, Sukumar Ray (Ray, 1997), comes to mind. In Ray’s story, written in the style of Carrollian nonsense-literature, the protago- nist has a bizarre experience: his handkerchief turns into a cat. The cat (or the handkerchief-cat), however, is not bothered by this metamor - phosis. In fact, it claims that it is simultaneously a cat, a handkerchief as well as a semi-colon. This strange feline argument resembles the prob - lematic questions about identity and action that video games also ask.

In the three identities that the cat provides, each is equally valid and in effect, the cat claims to be all the three things and even more.

These examples describe a situation where there is a multiplicity of events and where the shift in identities that this results in is only pos - sible as a process of ‘becoming’. Further, the multiple identities exist as

part of an assemblage: a concept that is important even in the general scheme of analysing video games and their characteristics. The contin - uum of the ‘zone of becoming’ is also a valid metaphor for describing other aspects of video game theory such as the contested relation-

ships between the ludic and narrative elements, or the magic circle that supposedly separates the play world and the real world. The com - plexity of the video game-assemblage, therefore, cannot be analysed in terms of binaries and watertight categorisations because these ignore the multiplicity that informs any understanding of video games.

This, however, is still not a universal realisation. Game studies’ crit- ics often react like the protagonist of Ray’s story: for them, the game

209

S. Mukherjee, *Video Games and Storytelling*

' Souvik Mukherjee 2015

210 *Story*

is either the handkerchief or the cat. This, however, is a unitary cate - gorisation that video games consistently resist and therefore, can result in much bewilderment. A consequence of this is that the field is still fraught with opposing contested claims. The Ludology–Narratology debate, mentioned earlier, has now more or less faded away from the critical horizon. Newer debates have taken its place; yet these too are based on very similar binary frameworks. Two very recent comments by eminent game critics indicate further problems with the perception of the field.

**The threat of video games**

The first comment is made by Juul in a blog-posting celebrating five years of his blog, ‘The Ludologist’. Juul states that ‘it’s official: the new conflict in video game studies is between those who study players and those who study games’ (Juul, 2008). To such an observation, the most common response is that studying players and studying games cannot be seen as separate because, as this thesis illustrates, playing a video game is a process that involves both the player and the game-algorithm. Any such one-sided argument is bound to resemble the conflict from *Gulliver’s Travels* where the tiny people of Lilliput and Blefuscu were per- manently at war over whether to eat a boiled egg from the little end or the bigger end. Juul, himself, in a follow-up posting, clearly distances himself from such a conflict. He maintains that ‘I find it really disturb - ing to think that one should have to make a choice like that. I think that different questions and methods should co-exist’ (Ibid.).

The second comment, revealingly (and somewhat sensationally) titled ‘Why is the book world threatened by gamers?’, is a recent posting on *The Guardian Gamesblog* by Aleks Krotoski:

Books are the equivalent of single-player games and old-school web - sites. They are snapshots of information at a single point in time, where stories are created and navigated from the point of view of one person. Social media has changed the nature of information gathering and production, and multiplayer games have re-inspired collaborative play. Static media which insists on remaining static is on its way to becoming a curiosity.

(Krotoski, 2008)

Krotoski’s comment about static media may be valid but the attempt to see the book and the game (in this case, probably the multiplayer game)
