8

Playing in the Zone of

Becoming II: ‘Becoming’ as Identity-Formation in Video Games

**‘Becoming’: From action to engagement**

The ‘zone of becoming’ in *S.T.A.L.K.E.R*, is a space where the player literally and metaphorically gains another identity. The player enters the game as a Stalker who has been left for dead on the outskirts of the Zone, suffering from a complete memory loss. The progress in the gameplay therefore involves the development of the identity of the pro- tagonist in the game’s ‘plot’ (or the *avatar*) and simultaneously, also that of the player. Within the space of possibility, or the ‘zone of becoming’, the identity of the player-protagonist in the computer game changes as the possibilities within the affection-image are actualised as the action- image. Certain games like *Fable* (Big Blue Box, 2004) or *Black and White* (Lionhead Studios, 2001) lay this down in no ambiguous terms: what one *does* in the game determines what one *becomes*. This perception of a shift in identity is a symptom of ‘becoming’. Following on from the earlier discussion on agency, this chapter shows how the identifi- cation occurs not only with the avatar but also with parts of the entire game-environment and the machine itself.

In the film *The Matrix* (Wachowski and Wachowski, 1999), Morpheus takes Neo inside an empty simulation program and tells him that his existence within the program is in the form of a ‘residual self image’

or the subconscious maintenance of one’s projected physical appear- ance in the digital world. This seems to be influenced by the gameplay experience and is a literal plugging into the game. The video game experience, however, is not as seamless; perhaps a closer cinematic rep - resentation can be found in David Cronenberg’s *Existenz* (Cronenberg, 1999), which heavily emphasises the organic nature of the gameplay

174

S. Mukherjee, *Video Games and Storytelling*

' Souvik Mukherjee 2015

*Playing in the Zone of Becoming II* 175

experience. Gamers are only too well aware that any such identification with in-game characters cannot be *total*.

So far two factors have been seen as vital for the construction of any gameplay: the space of possible events and the choices made during the course of gameplay. There is a third major factor that mediates between the first two. The closest corresponding terms for the latter, in current research, are ‘engagement’, ‘immersion’, ‘engrossment’ or ‘involvement’. In the analysis of ludic action as becoming started in Chapter 7, involvement was introduced as its other key facet: choices made within the zone of becoming are only possible when there is a deep involvement between the game system and the player. Calleja also introduces the rather useful term, ‘incorporation’; the role of this vis-à-vis involvement and within the zone of becoming will be addressed later.

All the various aspects in which becoming can be seen in process in earlier narrative media are also inherent in more recent media forms, including video games. With this in mind, the complexities of this experience will be explored further in terms of becoming.

Not surprisingly, the attempts to describe the involvement in video games start through comparisons with earlier media, albeit using a dif- ferent critical vocabulary. Murray compares the experience with the holodeck in the *Star Trek: Voyager* series where Captain Janeway inter-

acts directly with the characters and events of a gothic holonovel set in Victorian England. Ryan comments on the involvement between text and reader in novels such as *Madame Bovary* (Flaubert, 2010) and Charlotte Bronte’s *Shirley* (Bronte, 1998). However, it remains to be seen how far these earlier accounts succeed in representing the process of gameplay.

**In the holodeck: ‘Immersiveness’ and video games**

To describe the involvement in gameplay, Murray uses the term ‘immer - sion’. Many other commentators, some important exceptions notwith- standing, have also followed suit in accepting it as the standard term. The present analysis will, however, continue using ‘involvement’ in order to avoid the problematic connotations of ‘immersion’ that have emerged in subsequent research.

For Murray, the roots of immersion run deep in traditional literary criticism and link with Coleridge’s notion of the ‘willing suspension of disbelief’ (Coleridge, 1847, p. 442). At the other extreme, she projects a futuristic science-fiction vision of digital immersiveness by comparing
