4

Reading Games and Playing Books: Game, Play and Storytelling

**The ludic and the narrative: Crossed destinies**

The traveller in Calvino’s *The Castle of Crossed Destinies* begins his series of strange tales with an even stranger description of how they were nar - rated to him. In a castle, where some unknown power had rendered everyone speechless, the guests were still telling each other their stories but they were doing so in a rather unique way. The traveller describes a scene where tarot cards were laid out after the banquet and what followed thereafter:

One of the guests drew the scattered [tarot] cards to himself, leaving a lar ge part of the table clear; [... ] We a ll notice d the resem blance between his face and the face on the card, [... ] an d that he was preparing to tell his story.

(Calvino, 1979, p. 6)

In the novel, the guests tell their stories using combinations of

tarot cards: ludic combinations having in them an essential nar - rative purpose. Written in 1969, long before critics started making claims for video games as narrative media and the ensuing Ludology– Narratology debates, Calvino’s novel brings to the forefront the essential supplementarity between stories and games by using the trope of storytelling through tarot cards.

The account in Calvino’s novel does not come as a surprise. In fact, it connects well with his concept of the literature-machine described in Chapter 2, where literature is described as a ‘combinatorial game’, which prefigures the machinic textuality of video games. Working with

75

S. Mukherjee, *Video Games and Storytelling*

' Souvik Mukherjee 2015

76 *Game*

concepts similar to Calvino, some accounts of gameplay contribute to the definition of video games by further enlarging on its textual aspect. Dovey and Kennedy’s definition of the video game ‘text’ in their founda- tional book, *Game Cultures*, clearly links it to the concept of ‘gameplay’, a term used by gamers to describe the playing experience: ‘the “text”,

if we are to use that term at all, becomes the complex interaction between the player and the game – or what is described as gameplay’ (Dovey and Kennedy, 2006, p. 6). Therefore, video games are simulta - neously literature-machines besides being ludic-machines. At its very outset, this book has argued for the *intrinsic* relationship between the game and story elements in video games; in this chapter, it will look at the supplementarity between the very concepts of the ludic and the narrative.

Before addressing the relationship of games and storytelling, it would be useful to unpack the notion of what games are. Critical thinking

on video games has concentrated for very long on the very nature of games per se. According to most definitions of games, rules form the most important means of defining games. Salen and Zimmerman define games as ‘a system in which players engage in an artificial con - flict, defined by rules, that results in a quantifiable outcome’ (Salen

and Zimmerman, 2003, p. 96). Juul claims that rules give all games their technical and machinic characteristics and they construct a ‘state- machine’ that responds to player actions (see Chapter 3). This, then, is an important similarity that non-electronic games have with their electronic counterparts – by this definition, all types of games are machinic systems.13 Writing his ‘Manifesto for a Ludic Century’ in 2013, Zimmerman has no doubts whatsoever:

The rise of computers has paralleled the resurgence of games in our culture. This is no accident. Games like Chess, Go, and Parcheesi are much like digital computers, machines for creating and storing numerical states. In this sense, computers didn’t create games; games created computers.

(Zimmerman and Chaplin, 2013)

The similarity of games to machines is clearly established in his com - ment. Digital games provide an excellent example of how the machinic and the ludic exist in a state of interplay. The ludic elements such as a situation of artificial conflict, aim for a quantifiable outcome (such

as winning, losing and scoring points) and the very essential but largely unanalysable element of fun, which is characteristic of play in general,14 are very much part of video games as they are of non-digital games:
