7

Playing in the Zone of Becoming I: Agency and Becoming in Video Games

**The problem of attributing agency in video games**

When the Prince of Persia turns the clock back yet again and recreates his narrative, who is the author of this story? Is it the player acting as (w)reader, both reading and scripting the story, or is it the game designer who shapes the outline of the plot and the spaces of possi- bility? Finally, what about the Prince himself – as the embodiment of the artificially intelligent processes and the algorithmic environment of the game? The multiple narrative strands in the rhizomatic structure of video games raise yet another key question in the analysis of video games as narratives. How is it possible to explain the creation of these multiple narratives? Can the process of (w)reading these narrative actu- alisations into existence be likened to authorship? Even if it is, then such a process is quite different from the commonly held conception of the text as a product of the author’s imagination. In video games, as stated previously, the process of narrative construction involves the machine and the player besides the game designers themselves. A straightforward explanation of gameplay as authorship cannot suffice to comprehend the situation in its full complexity.

Attempts have already been made by game theorists to explain the process and in one of its earliest explanations, Murray famously claims that the ‘[interactor’s experience] is not authorship but agency’ (Murray, 1997, p. 153). The pioneering work in this area by Murray has been fur - ther developed by herself as well as by many other commentators in the last decade and ‘agency’ has gained prominence as a fundamental con- cept in game studies. However, whether the choices in video games can be considered in terms of agency is a moot question because conceptions

146

S. Mukherjee, *Video Games and Storytelling*

' Souvik Mukherjee 2015

*Playing in the Zone of Becoming I: Agency and Becoming in Video Games* 147

of agency tend to be essentially human-centred; although it accounts for the game-designers and the players, it ignores the machine’s potential for influencing the choices in the game.

The topic of agency is, of course, not exclusive to video game studies;

it has been a longstanding issue of debate in philosophy, theology and the other liberal arts, and a fuller understanding of agency in game stud - ies therefore needs to relate to the debates in these other areas. Video games, however, shed new light on the issue of agency in terms of their constant interactivity, technicity and their multitelic structure that cre -

ate the possibility for choice. Indeed, it is not possible to understand ludic agency without considering the analyses of the abovementioned factors. The factors that influence analyses of ludic agency have been the subject of much debate. In fact, in Chapter 6, I quote Bogost as claiming that the Deleuzian idea of multiplicity is inapplicable to video games on the grounds that it precludes preordination and deliberation, two key elements in the discourse on agency. There are two reasons for citing this example. On the one hand, it shows how vital eminent game stud- ies commentators such as Bogost consider the link between agency and the other characteristic elements of video games such as multiplicity. On the other hand, as illustrated earlier, Bogost’s objection needs to be viewed in comparison with a more nuanced consideration of Deleuzian philosophy and ludic agency.

This chapter aims to broaden the base of these analyses by firstexpos- ing their problems and then showing that their range extends much farther than is presently understood. In this chapter, agency in video games will thus be no more understood as a unique characteristic of a new media but rather in terms of a larger discourse through a com - parison with similar processes in other media. Finally, it is also vital to understand that agency in video games cannot be considered separate from the process of engagement (or involvement) as will be enlarged on in the following chapter. Galloway’s account of video games in terms of the Deleuzian concept of the action-image is useful in understand- ing ludic agency in terms of its very basis: the action in computer gameplay. Despite Bogost’s contention, the Deleuzian framework retains its usefulness in the analysis of agency and using concepts related to the action-image it reveals how the processes of agency and engage - ment integrate within the Deleuzian concept of ‘becoming’, already introduced in Chapter 2 as a key theme in reading video games. The process of ‘becoming’ will be analysed in connection to the discussion of the action-image as initiated by Galloway and will be examined in detail through the application of this analysis to the computer game
