2

Machinic Stories: The Literature Machine, Technicity and the Computer Game

**Nietzsche’s typewriter: Introducing the idea of the machinic text**

In a letter to a friend, typewritten on his famous Malling Hansen writing ball, Nietzsche observed that ‘our writing instruments contribute to our thoughts’ (Kittler, 1997, p. 13). Nietzsche’s comment links technology to what he calls ‘our thoughts’: by implication, this can also mean what is understood by ‘text’, especially in the broader Barthesian sense, of some- thing that is not restricted to materiality. Nietzsche’s comment, made over a century ago, therefore implies that the claim made by so-called ‘new media’ from the last two decades to having newly established the link between the text and the machine is problematic. Of course, it

is true that technological developments in the last few decades have strengthened the notion of the machinelike nature of texts. For exam - ple, hypertext and electronic text are composed of machine code that is

present as a layer of machine-readable text beneath whatever text they convey to us. Similarly, machines are also increasingly being seen as texts, and complex machinic systems like video games and simulations are beginning to be perceived both as programs and as texts that can be

read. However, as Nietzsche’s observation indicates, the text-machine relation is not a new development; instead, it is originary. An analysis

of video games, arguably one of the latest manifestations of machinic textuality, as well as ‘new media’, helps to examine this idea more deeply.

This chapter will attempt to show how the machinic and the tex - tual are originary and how the study of newer machinic media like video games helps to highlight this relationship in all forms of text,

25

S. Mukherjee, *Video Games and Storytelling*

' Souvik Mukherjee 2015

26 *Machine*

both new and old. To begin with, however, it will be useful to establish a background for the analysis by outlining the concepts which theo - rists like Aarseth, N. Katherine Hayles and Derrida use to describe the machinic nature of texts. This will be followed by a more detailed enquiry, in terms of a Deleuzoguattarian account of the machinic nature

of printed narratives and an analysis of the textual element in video games developing the idea of the technological assemblage in the Intro - duction. This will aim to establish video games as a literary machine

by showing how literature itself is machinic and pointing to the clear similarities that it therefore has with the computer game. Further, by comparing the reading strategies of the computer game and the printed text, it is possible to further illustrate the originary relation between textuality and technicity.

**The cybertext, the technotext and the paper-machine: Models of machinic textuality**

Conceptions about machines and texts have changed significantly in recent times. Cybernetics, the interdisciplinary study of complex sys- tems, recognised that machines do not function as isolated units: the user also forms part of the machine-complex. In his work on the anti-aircraft gun, Norbert Wiener comments:

The actual fire control is a system involving human beings and machines at the same time. It must be reduced, from an engineer - ing point of view, to a single structure, which means either a human interpretation of the machine or a mechanical interpretation of the

operator, or both.

(Wiener, 2003, p. 67)

For cyberneticists like Wiener, information flow rather than energy is the key entity in the man-machine equation. The cybernetic understanding of the machine is based on the mechanism of feedback, defined by Ross Ashby, pioneer of cybernetics, as the ‘circularity of action [that] exists between the parts of a dynamic system’ (Ashby, 1979, p. 53). Based on information flow between the man-machine complex, many more sys- tems could qualify as machines. A good example would be the text. The text can be seen as a machinic entity facilitating a feedback loop of information flow between itself and its user (or reader). It is therefore no surprise that this notion influences various accounts of machinic textuality. Aarseth’s concept of the ‘cybertext’, the pioneering concept
