3

(W)Reading the Machinic Game-Narrative

**(W)reading between the lexia and the scriptons: Experiencing the machinic text**

In the introduction to his book on reading program-code, author and programmer Diomidis Spinellis writes that ‘in a few years our students will learn from existing open-source systems, just as their peers studying

a language learn from the great literature’ (Spinellis, 2006, p. xxvii). This comparison between reading code and reading literature cannot be con - sidered fortuitous; rather it vindicates and simultaneously follows from the machinic nature of literature itself, as Chapter 2 illustrates.

Nevertheless, it must be noted that reading in the machinic text does not work unidirectionally. According to the model of feedback discussed earlier in relation to cybernetics, the machine also responds to the user’s reading: in other words, it ‘reads’ the user. Compiler programs read and translate into low-level computer languages the commands written by

the cyborgian assemblage formed by the programmer and the high - level language. Although the process is more complex than it sounds on paper, its complexity is less apparent to the lay user. However, this is more difficult to miss in video games where the reading is more obvi - ously bidirectional. The game constitutes a text that is ‘read’ by the user and which, in turn, reads the user, by making artificially intelli- gent responses to the user’s actions. The text in question combines the program-code and the story in an originary relationship. Whereas the code’s relation to the user is more latent at the level of the software; on the level of the story, it is obvious that the machine and the user jointly engage in story building. This observation raises two other major issues. Firstly, the act of reading is intrinsically related to the act of writing (because the processes of reading and building the story work in a feed -

back loop). Secondly, the act of reading (and writing) is shown as being

48

S. Mukherjee, *Video Games and Storytelling*

' Souvik Mukherjee 2015

*(W)Reading the Machinic Game-Narrative* 49

contingent on the act of playing. The experience of the machinic text in video games is, therefore, constituted by a complex of reading, writing and play taken together.

Knowledge of the intricacies of the structure of the machinic text is required before it is possible to understand how to read it. First, it will be necessary to study the recent models of analysing the machinic text. Computer-oriented textual forms such as the hypertext and the cybertext claim to have a different set of textual characteristics

than earlier textual forms and consequently, also necessitate different approaches to reading when compared to earlier media. This analysis will study each model separately.

In the 1960s Theodore Nelson coined the term ‘hypertext’ to describe these ‘text chunks connected by links which offer the reader different pathways’ (Landow, 2006, p. 3), where the text was thought to exist as varying combinations of hyperlinks, actively chosen by the reader or user. Therefore, the reading process was considered different from that in earlier texts in that, here, the reader was seen as effectively construct- ing the text. This led to the coinage of the portmanteau word ‘wreading’, combining both senses of writing and reading. According to Michael R. Allen:

The reader of the hypertext is, according to George Landow and oth - ers, a wreader who is as much a producer of texts as a consumer of them. In this new reader, both production and consumption of texts

is combined into one process that is self-contained.

(Allen, 2008)

Landow, a key theorist of the hypertext, further develops on this in his concept of ‘very active reader’. He distinguishes between the active read- ing possible within electronic texts such as typical hypertexts, which is experienced through a movement from link to link, and what he calls the ‘atypical hypertext’, like weblogs, which permit readers to add their own links and materials. As he comments, ‘no matter how much power readers have to choose their ways through a hypertext, they never obtain the same degree of power – or have to expend as much effort – as those who write their texts in response to another’s’ (Landow, p. 9).

Although, for Landow, the hypertextual experience is more immedi - ate in technologies such as weblogs, which allow on-site comments on texts, this (w)reading is not restricted to electronic media and ‘when one considers the history of ancient literature and recent popular cul - ture, the figure of the reader-as-writer hardly appears at all strange’
