THE GIFT EXCHANGE GAME 

Many years ago high on a mountain, there lived a family named WRIGHT. They had many cousins whose names were also WRIGHT. Every Christmas the clan gathered to have a party and no one was LEFT out. Sally WRIGHT was in charge of the guest list and she LEFT nothing to chance. This party was planned and things had to be just RIGHT. Mary WRIGHT had LEFT home early to do her shopping, but LEFT her gift list at home. Now this created a problem RIGHT from the start for her. John WRIGHT had gone to cut a tree for the big affair. It had to be the RIGHT size to stand on the LEFT side of the fire place. The decorations were ready and waiting. Mother WRIGHT was in charge of the kitchen and everyone had to bring the RIGHT food to fit the menu and no one LEFT home without their share. There were children by the score who played RIGHT in the middle of the floor and LEFT toys everywhere. Now it wouldn't really be festive if they had no Santa Clause, so Charles WRIGHT had his wife Jeannie WRIGHT make him a Santa suit. She put two pockets  on  the  RIGHT  side  and  one  on  the  LEFT.  But  Jake  WRIGHT  felt  LEFT  out because he said he had a RIGHT to be Santa because he had been LEFT out for five years. Mother WRIGHT had to settle the argument RIGHT then and there before she LEFT for the kitchen. Charles and Jake both got mad and LEFT in a huff. But just then Uncle Ben WRIGHT walked RIGHT through the door and said he had a suit LEFT over from last year that would be all RIGHT. So that was settled and LEFT everyone feeling just fine except Charles  and  Jake,  but  they  soon  realized  the  Christmas  spirit  should  prevail,  so  they marched  RIGHT  back  into  the  house.  Tommy  WRIGHT,  of  the  RIGHT  side  of  the mountain, LEFT his snow shoes at home so he was late reaching the party at the RIGHT time, but he was still able to help wrap the gifts which were placed on the RIGHT side of the fireplace and on the LEFT side of the tree. Every WRIGHT in the county was RIGHT on time, dressed in their Sunday best. They gathered round the table, each woman had a man on her RIGHT and also on her LEFT. They laughed RIGHT loudly as they ate their dinner and as they LEFT the table everyone cried "I ate too much!" Then came Santa RIGHT on time to deliver the gifts to each WRIGHT.  

Now I hope you have the RIGHT present for yourself, because that’s all that is LEFT of our story!  

Except to wish you a Merry Christmas. Isn’t that RIGHT?? 
